#LyX 2.5 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 643
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass acmart
\begin_preamble
% For algorithm2e
\renewcommand{\algorithmcfname}{ALGORITHM}
\SetAlFnt{\small}
\SetAlCapFnt{\small}
\SetAlCapNameFnt{\small}
\SetAlCapHSkip{0pt}
\IncMargin{-\parindent}
\end_preamble
\options format=acmsmall, review=false, screen=true
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
InStar
algorithm2e
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\begin_local_layout
Format 60
PackageOptions algorithm2e ruled
\end_local_layout
\language english
\language_package auto
\inputencoding auto-legacy
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry true
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 0
\use_package esint 0
\use_package mathdots 0
\use_package mathtools 0
\use_package mhchem 0
\use_package stackrel 0
\use_package stmaryrd 0
\use_package undertilde 0
\cite_engine natbib
\cite_engine_type numerical
\biblio_style plainnat
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification default
\crossref_package refstyle
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\backgroundcolor none
\fontcolor none
\notefontcolor lightgray
\boxbgcolor red
\table_border_color default
\table_odd_row_color default
\table_even_row_color default
\table_alt_row_colors_start 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 2
\tocdepth 2
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\docbook_mathml_version 0
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Prela:
 A Purely Algebraic Relational Query Language
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Codd's Relational Algebra is the theoretical foundation underlying all modern relational databases.
 Yet,
 this formalism is not an algebra in the mathematical sense:
 operators must be annotated with context-dependent parameters like join predicates,
 projection columns,
 and group-by attributes to fully specify semantics.
 These annotations lead to verbose queries,
 and complicate system implementation.
 For example,
 query 29a from the Join Order Benchmark spans over a hundred lines when expressed in the Pandas dataframe library,
 as shown in Figure TODO in the appendix.
 The original SQL query takes up 66 lines,
 and one would need some scratch paper to figure out how the 17 input tables join with each other.
 On the other hand,
 the query engine must carefully track such annoations throughout the entire query lifecycle including parsing,
 optimization,
 compilation and execution,
 resulting in complex system design and can lead to subtle bugs TODO CITE.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In this paper,
 we introduce Prela,
 a new query language based on Tarski's Relational Algebra CITE – a purely algebraic formalism for relations predating Codd's by three decades.
 By insisting on purity,
 Prela leads to delightfully concise yet readable queries.
 Figure TODO shows the complete Prela query for JOB 29a whose intent is clear at a glance:
 we're looking for movies satisfying the conditions in lines TODO,
 then returning its title (which must be 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

Shrek 2
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

) as well as cast members satisfying further conditions.
 For system builders,
 the purely algebraic nature of Prela admits 
\emph on
direct embedding
\emph default
 in a host programming language.
 This means Prela can be implemented as a 
\emph on
library
\emph default
 with regular functions and types instead of a 
\emph on
domain-specific language
\emph default
 requiring bespoke infrastructure like parsers,
 type checkers,
 and runtimes.
 Direct embedding leads to simple implementation,
 and allows Prela to inherit powerful language infrastructure developed for the host language.
 Indeed,
 the query in Figure TODO is executable Julia code,
 where variables like 
\begin_inset listings
inline true
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
movie
\end_layout

\end_inset

,
 
\begin_inset listings
inline true
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
production_year
\end_layout

\end_inset

,
 and 
\begin_inset listings
inline true
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
info
\end_layout

\end_inset

 are regular Julia variables of type 
\begin_inset listings
inline true
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
Relation
\end_layout

\end_inset

,
 and constructs like 
\begin_inset listings
inline true
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
.
\end_layout

\end_inset

,
 
\begin_inset listings
inline true
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
&
\end_layout

\end_inset

,
 and 
\begin_inset listings
inline true
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
,
\end_layout

\end_inset

 are implemented as regular functions.
 While our Julia implementation relies on powerful language features including multiple dispatch and operator overloading,
 Prela can also be instantiated in other host languages without such features,
 at the cost of moderately more verbose queries.
 Figure TODO in the appendix shows our example query in a Rust implementation of Prela.
 Yet another benefit of the algebraic approach is that Prela gives the programmer fine-grained control over query execution,
 in contrast to the declarative nature of SQL.
 In principle,
 declarative language design is motivated by the focus on expressing high-level intent as opposed to low-level mechanics.
 However,
 the decoupling of the query and its execution poses an obstacle when the programmer needs to finetune query performance,
 as they must resort to awkward query plan hints or special operators like 
\begin_inset listings
inline true
status open

\begin_layout Plain Layout
CROSS JOIN
\end_layout

\end_inset

.
 In contrast,
 a Prela query 
\emph on
is
\emph default
 a query plan,
 as it is built up with relations and relational operators.
 The programmer can finetune all (logical) aspects of query planning including join ordering,
 materialization,
 and operator pushdown/pullup by directly rewriting the query.
 In our experiments,
 an AI agent is able to optimize all 113 JOB queries in Prela to perform competitively with DuckDB.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
